---
layout: post
title:  "Student Exchange Part 2: My Experience with Undergraduate Education in America (versus Singapore)"
date:   2022-04-02 21:22:00 +0800
categories: jekyll update
---

[Part 1 here](https://faezs.com/blog/SEP)

From January to March 2022, I had the opportunity to study at UC Davis as an exchange student.

Some background information about me:

- At the time of student exchange, I was a 3rd year Electrical Engineering student at the National University of Singapore.
- I would generally consider myself to be academically competent with 4.67/5.00 CAP (which translates to ~3.7 GPA in US universities).
- The only experience I had with university education before student exchange was entirely online, with exclusively open-book tests.

## Course Reviews (continued)

### EEC 130A: Electromagnetics I

This course was taught by Professor Brian Kolner. There were only 5 students registered for this course. Why? Look up his Ratemyprofessor score and you'll understand :).

The text for this course was Purcell and Morin 3 ed. which I felt was a good book when used as reference material but absolute trash when used by first-time learners. The explanations get super fluffy and it reads more like a novel rather than an actual textbook after a while. I think Griffiths' is probably better but I never bothered to do a comparison due to the lack of time.

The main focus of this course was the entirety of Purcell and Morin minus the part related to special relativity, plus transmission lines which we only received handouts on the last week for (yikes).

It seems like Dr Kolner really wants his students to learn the material well, but he ultimately falls short of being a successful teacher. During lectures, he only ever does derivations of things already in the textbook and maybe asks us some questions to jog our memory about basic concepts. He then runs through some examples but never really teaches the approach to solving particular problems. This is obviously not a good way to teach undergraduates who are learning the material for the first time (I will expand on this later when I do a comparison with teaching at NUS).

I thought I was doing fine for this course until I decided to do some E&M problem sets from NUS (PC2020) and I realised that I never truly learned anything from this course. 10 weeks of EEC 130A and I couldn't even solve the most basic problems in E&M (statics, transients, boundary value problems, anything, really). I also realised that I came into this course basically forgetting almost all of vector calculus, which prompted me to take MAT 021D (Vector Analysis) concurrently (didn't really help lol, more on this later).

Regardless of how things turned out, I still gained 2 really good things from this class: I learned how to use LaTeX and I made a good friend who works in my industry (Hi Alyssa!).

#### Office Hours & Consultation

Dr Kolner had office hour slots every week but they weren't at fixed times. I never attended office hours for this class (starting to see a pattern here?).

#### Lectures

During online instruction, lectures were conducted on Zoom and recorded. Dr Kolner provided pdf lecture notes for the first 3 chapters but then he said it was too time-consuming to make those so he just went with handwritten lecture notes that he would project on the screen for the following lectures. His penmanship (and draftsmanship) is probably the best I've ever seen from any university professor, so props to him for that.

Lecture quality was generally ok. I feel that he covered things that were definitely important for understanding the stuff in the textbook. He expected us to do the readings for each of the chapters in advance (I could only keep this up for the first 3 weeks until midterms came around). One thing lacking was worked examples that weren't from the textbook. The lectures were almost 2 hours long so there was definitely time to squeeze in more worked examples.

There were supposed to be quizzes during the lectures but he only did 2 quizzes in total in the last 2 weeks. The quizzes were supposed to be simple but I pretty much can't solve E&M problems without reference material so I bombed both of them (together with everyone else lol).

#### Assignments & Projects

Homework was assigned every week. During online instruction, homework was supposed to be typeset in LaTeX. I hadn't used LaTeX at all prior to this class so I had to learn a bunch of new things. It wasn't too bad, and I know how to use LaTeX now so I use it for my CV and resume too.

Once we transitioned to face-to-face instruction, he gave the option of handing in handwritten homework during class or handing in typeset solutions before the end of the week. Obviously I went with typeset solutions to give myself more time to complete the homework, and also because my handwriting is garbage.

The homework problems were mostly from the textbook, with some odd problems he came up with (or pulled from somewhere). I was generally ok with the homework problems because I could refer to the textbook or to some other reference material online if I got stuck. The style of homework problems called for a lot of derivations from first principles which I pretty much forgot because the last time I took physics was 3 semesters ago.

I think I averaged an 80% for all the homework. The other students weren't doing too well but I tried to help them as much as I could. We got a class Discord going in the 2nd week after I messaged everyone on Zoom.

#### Exams

There was a midterm and a final for this course. The midterm did not follow what was written in the syllabus (probably because the professor didn't expect there to be only 5 students).

The midterm ended up being a take-home exam and we had 5 (?) days to finish it. It wasn't too bad because it was basically 'harder' homework.

The final was supposed to be open-book, on the condition that everyone owned a physical copy of the textbook. Only one guy in the class (Hi Jason!) actually bought the physical textbook and everyone else had an online copy (obtained legally of course). So taking that into consideration, he allowed us to prepare 4 sheets of notes, double-sided, for the final exam. I pretty much got 90% of the syllabus on there and it still didn't help. I think everyone else screwed up the final as much as I did. Obviously, the root cause was the fact that we weren't trained to solve problems but instead examine them with a very big fisheye lens and pretend like we knew what we were doing :).

Also, because the homework on transmission lines involved using a smith chart, I thought that would also show up in the final exam and I bought a compass (the thing you use to draw perfect circles) in expectation of that, but smith charts never appeared in the final. Oh well.

#### Game Plan & Results

This was the course I was the most worried about because I knew that if the final wasn't open-book, I would barely be able to hit a 50% overall weighted mark.

My plan was just to get as many points as I could from the homework and the take-home midterm and hope for the best. I pretty much knew that everyone would get screwed over for the final because the professor doesn't give partial credit (he only marks your final answer). I tried doing 5 problems from each chapter to prepare for the final but it was futile because the approach to problem solving was non-existent. It didn't help that the textbook problems were absolute garbage for practice.

Fortunately, the professor set pretty low percentages for the grades. I finished with a 48% and got a B. The other grades in the class were 2 B's and 2 C's. Probably had to finish with a 60% to get an A or something like that.

Expected Grade: D-  
Final Grade: B

### MAT 021D: Vector Analysis

Alright... this was the most interesting class I took at UC Davis, and I don't mean that in a good way.

This course was taught by Dr Andrew Waldron. The TA for my section is the (amazing) -redacted- love that guy. This course is basically the entirety of vector calculus. I forgot the textbook but I think it was Thomas' Calculus: Early Transcendentals, 13 ed. This course was completely CA-based so there were no exams.

I took this course because I wanted to refresh my knowledge on vector calculus so I could tackle the problems in EEC 130A, and also because I was taking it with a friend who desperately needed my help because he was taking 7 courses and doing a remote internship at the same time and basically dying in every single way possible (Hi Zikun!).

Most of the things in this course were pretty simple to me, except for some odd things that I never bothered to learn before like TNB frames and osculating circles. The rest of the content is stuff I've gone through before and I was pretty much treating it as a refresher. Strangely enough, I managed to map this class to an upper-division calculus module at NUS, so I was taking it for credit too.

#### Office Hours & Consultation

Waldron and the TAs had plenty of office hours throughout the week and there was a Discord channel managed by the TAs where you could go to ask questions too. UC Davis also had a calculus clinic(?) that you could attend if you needed help with pretty much anything related to calculus. I never needed to attend any of these because I'm an NUS student.

#### Lectures (and Discussions)

There were 3 lectures a week that I never once attended. Apparently, if you took down notes during the lectures and uploaded them to the Canvas discussion forum, you would get 1% of extra credit or something like that. The catch was that there would be a few letters of the alphabet assigned to each week, and only people with first names that started with any of those letters could post their notes on that week only. I never bothered posting the notes because going through one lecture was already a massive time-sink (each lecture is 2 hours long).

Discussion sessions were held once a week with the TA of our section. There would be a quiz during the discussion session, with all of the quizzes being worth 30%(?) of the total grade. During online-instruction, the quizzes were basically just discussion problems that were marked for completion. You would get 10/10 for each 'quiz' in the first 3 weeks if you just wrote a bunch of nonsense and submitted it. I only submitted the first quiz and never bothered for the next two (got 0 for both of those).

Once we moved to in-person instruction, we had to take actual quizzes in class. Before each quiz, our TA would just write all the formulas and equations that we needed to solve the quiz (he wasn't supposed to). So the quizzes ended up being pretty easy. I think after a while, they just became so hilariously easy that the answer for each quiz would be zero (closed line integral of a conservative vector field, etc.). I think the lowest I got for the quizzes was an 8/10 (besides the two 0 mark quizzes I got earlier), and I got 
10 for every quiz after the 6th week or something like that.

The TA was a really funny guy and he's probably the only reason why I even remotely enjoyed this course. He would fumble a lot when doing discussion problems and end up Googling for formulas and other simple stuff because he 'forgot'. I think he was just pretending to be dumb to not make the students feel bad because I checked his credentials and he was definitely what you'd call a 'gigabrain' (polyglot, plenty of research experience, PhD candidate).

#### Assignments & Projects

Homework was assigned each week, with the deadline being two weeks later. There was also these online problem sets on a platform called Webwork that you were pretty much guaranteed to get full marks for (although some people still got 0 for those, how'd that happen???). There was also a 'final project' that I did in like 2 hours.

The homework problems were very strange. I think only 70% of the homework problems were even remotely related to vector calculus. The rest were just plain weird like computing wedge products (???), which no engineering student would ever need to do LMAO. He would always ask for drawings in the homework but I really couldn't be bothered sometimes and I lost some credit for that. I think my friend ended up scoring better than me for the homework just because I got lazy with the drawings.

The final project was basically a mega-homework where the first part asked for a summary of everything taught in the course. I tried my best to summarize everything despite not attending a single lecture. The rest of the final project was just typical homework problem sets that were a little more difficult than usual. I ended up getting above the mean for it.

#### Exams

lol

#### Game Plan & Results

I knew 90% of the content of this course already so I wasn't worried about failing or anything. Just aimed to get the homework done, show up for the quizzes and submit the final project on time. Although, I think missing out on those 2 free quizzes at the start messed up my final grade. I ended up getting 90% but my friend got 91%, and that made the difference between an A- and an A. Whoops.

Expected Grade: A  
Final Grade: A-

### MGT 150: Technology Management

This class was just weird. It was my first time taking a non-STEM class in university and yeah... you non-STEM majors have it really easy. I think I could go braindead and still get an A+ for this class, not even joking.

This class was taught by Jane Harrington. I think the class is one of the requirements of a Minor in Management or something like that??? I don't even know. The only reason I took this class is because it could be mapped to one of the required fluff-mods I had to take at NUS.

The content for this class was... something I can't remember because it's all meaningless BS. I think the only part of this class that I can even remotely recall is a lecture on negotiations, which was just about the only interesting thing taught.

#### Office Hours & Consultation

There were office hours by the professor and 2 TAs. Apparently only one person showed up for office hours in the first week and the professor gave him a gift card or something for that. She announced it during the lecture (on Zoom) and expected everyone to clap or something like that. Really strange stuff... I never attended any of the office hours because why would you need to attend office hours for a course like this?

#### Lectures

Lectures were once a week and I attended all of them. I think it was important to attend them during online instruction because you needed to get your attendance in or you would lose participation marks (worth 10%). Attendance-taking for Zoom sessions was done by typing your name in the chat. Once things shifted to in-person, attendance wasn't taken but the professor would just randomly call out your name and if you weren't there, you would pretty much lose all your class participation. 

I was taking this course with a housemate who had a name that was pronounced the same way as someone else's in the class, so whenever the professor called either of their names, the other girl would always answer for her (they never figured out that both of them were different people), so she pretty much stopped attending in-person lectures and still managed to get her class participation in.

Discussions were also held once a week, with a smaller group of people. The TA for our section was really strict and it seemed like she genuinely believed all the crap that we were being taught in class (I guess that's what a non-STEM education does to you). She also had the habit of playing loud music before the start of class, either in the discussion room or the lecture hall (that's probably why I got tinnitus in my right ear now). So yeah, the TA is a terrible person and I only wish bad things upon her.

The group activities for both the lectures and discussions were definitely the best part of the course. I got to meet a lot of people from those activities and most of them were pretty chill.

#### Assignments & Projects

We were assigned to groups in the second week and we had group work during some weeks, individual work or both during other weeks. I can't remember anything about the group assignments except that we were given a scenario in some tech company and we had to make a decision about something... The other people in my group had experience taking the other management classes so I pretty much left it up to them to figure stuff out since their brains were obviously wired to ace this class.

In the first 2 weeks we also had this stupid thing called Creative Sprint where you would be given some prompt and you'd have to create something out of random things in your house, take a photo and post it on a public Miro board. Do it for 15 days and you got full credit. The Miro board could be edited by anyone at anytime so people were getting their submissions randomly deleted and were told to take screenshots (lol). At some point someone just deleted all the submissions for one of the sections so everyone in that section had to look for all the photos they posted and compile them together in a separate submission, it was a shitshow lmao.

I got nothing to say about the individual assignments, most of them were readings of some fluff articles about fluff topics or making forum posts about some fluffy thing. Really intellectually-stimulating stuff.

#### Exams

There was a midterm and a final. The format for the exams was unorthodox (much like everything else in this course). We had a group midterm where everyone just got together and sat in a meeting room in the Student Counselling Centre (I think that's what the place was called) for 3 hours and we split up work between multiple-choice questions, a long essay and there was also a Creative Sprint portion at the start... yeah... There was this guy sitting next to me for the entire midterm who never did a single thing (he had his laptop open but didn't even open the Google document that everyone was typing on). After the end of the exam, we became friends simply because we had a common hatred for this class (Hi Louis!). We ended up getting the highest in class for the midterm :).

For the final, it was a little different. The first part was done individually and it was a set of 30 multiple-choice questions and short-answer questions. The next part of the exam was group-based but we had to collaborate with another group in the class since the content was linked to all the group assignments we did in class (the management decisions for the fake tech company) and the group we collaborated with made similar decisions to us. I don't know what was going on during the final since there were like 10 people typing in the Google document at the same time. I figured I should just sit back and maybe fix some grammatical errors here and there if I could (lol). The final turned out pretty good, I don't know how well we scored in comparison to everyone else but it was almost full marks.

#### Game Plan & Results

I knew I couldn't possibly fail this class so I treated every lecture or discussion as a networking session, pretty much. Meeting new people was the best part of this class for me. Also found out that one of the guys in my discussion session was taking MAT 021D (we were in the same section for that class too), and he was also studying Electrical Engineering (Hi Andy!), so that was pretty cool. Got nothing else to say about this class except lol I hate non-STEM classes.

Expected Grade: ???  
Final Grade: A+

[PART 3 COMING SOON]
